━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
  CANlogger — Simply Put
  A plain-English guide to what this app is and how it works
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━


WHAT IS THIS APP?
─────────────────
You have five oscilloscopes (PicoScope 2204A units) each plugged into a
different wire in a vehicle's CAN bus network. A CAN bus is essentially
the nervous system of a vehicle — it is the set of wires that lets all the
electronic control units (the engine, the brakes, the dashboard, etc.) talk
to one another.

CANlogger is a program that runs on a mini PC, listens to all five of those
oscilloscopes at once, and saves a precise electrical picture of each wire —
thousands of times per second — so that you can study the health and behavior
of those signals later.

Think of it as a flight recorder, but for the electrical language your vehicle
speaks.


WHAT IS AN OSCILLOSCOPE DOING HERE?
────────────────────────────────────
An oscilloscope is an instrument that measures voltage over time — it draws
the shape of an electrical signal on a screen. Instead of just telling you
"there is 2.5 volts on this wire," it shows you the exact wave: how fast it
rises, how fast it falls, whether it is clean or noisy.

The PicoScope 2204A is a small oscilloscope that plugs into a USB port on
a computer, so the computer can receive and record those wave shapes directly
as numbers.

CANlogger takes a photograph of each wave every 10 milliseconds (one
hundredth of a second). Each photograph contains 50,000 individual voltage
readings packed together. That is what gives us the fine-grained picture we
need to catch subtle problems in the signal.


THE FIVE STREAMS
────────────────
Because you have five separate CAN buses (and therefore five separate
oscilloscopes), CANlogger runs five independent recorders in parallel —
one for each bus. They all run at the same time without interfering with
one another, like five film cameras rolling simultaneously on five different
subjects.

Each recorder keeps a log of:

  • Which bus it is watching
  • Which oscilloscope it came from
  • The exact microsecond the snapshot began
  • Every voltage reading in that snapshot


WHERE DOES THE DATA GO?
────────────────────────
When each 10-millisecond snapshot is captured, it is first saved to the
mini PC's own hard drive in a folder called the spool. This is a fast,
temporary holding area — like an inbox.

From the spool, the data can be forwarded to a PostgreSQL database. A
database is an organized, searchable filing cabinet for large amounts of
information. PostgreSQL is a well-respected, free, industrial-strength
database that runs on the same mini PC (or on a separate server if you
prefer). When you want to look back at what happened on CAN Bus 3 last
Tuesday at 2:47 in the morning, you ask the database and it finds it
instantly.

The reason we do not skip the spool and go straight to the database is
simple: the database is powerful but relatively slow. The spool accepts
data at full speed without any hesitation, and the database catches up
at its own comfortable pace in the background.


WHAT IS THE BACKEND?
─────────────────────
The backend is the engine room of the app — the part that does all the real
work but has no visible face. You never see it directly; it just runs quietly
in the background.

In practical terms it is a Python program. Python is a popular programming
language known for being readable and approachable. The backend:

  1. Talks to the oscilloscopes and pulls data from them
  2. Manages the five parallel recorders
  3. Writes the snapshots to the spool
  4. Forwards data to the database when ready
  5. Answers questions from the setup screen (more on that next)

The backend communicates using a set of web addresses, exactly like a
website. These addresses are called an API — Application Programming
Interface. Other programs (like the setup screen) send a message to one of
those addresses, and the backend responds. For example, one address starts
the capture, another stops it, another reports the current status.


WHAT IS THE SETUP SCREEN (THE FRONTEND)?
──────────────────────────────────────────
The frontend is the visible face — the screen you look at and click on. In
this app it is a simple web page that opens in any browser on the same PC.

It lets you:

  • Set the sample rate (how many readings per second each scope takes)
  • Set the window length (how many milliseconds each snapshot covers)
  • Set the cadence (how often a new snapshot starts)
  • Start or stop all five recorders with one button
  • Watch the live status of every bus in real time

Once you have set things up and clicked Start, you do not need to look at
this screen again. The app runs on its own indefinitely — the screen is only
there for the moments when you are configuring or checking in.


WHAT IS DOCKER?
────────────────
Imagine you want to move a fully assembled piece of factory equipment from
one building to another. If you disassemble it and try to rebuild it in the
new building, something might not fit — the ceiling is lower, the power
outlets are different, a part got lost in the move.

Docker solves this problem for software. It packages the entire app —
the Python engine, every library it depends on, the setup screen, and even
the database — into a self-contained box called a container. The container
carries everything it needs to run, so it behaves identically on your current
laptop, on the mini PC, or on any other machine that has Docker installed.

To transfer CANlogger to the mini PC, you copy the files and run one command.
Docker takes care of the rest. No manual installation, no version mismatches,
no surprises.

The file that describes what goes inside the container is called Dockerfile.
The file that describes how multiple containers (the app and the database)
work together is called docker-compose.yml.


WHAT IS GITHUB?
────────────────
GitHub is an online service for storing and version-tracking code. Think of
it as Google Drive, but designed specifically for programs. Every time a
meaningful change is made to CANlogger, that change is recorded with a
description of what was done and why. You can always look back at the full
history, compare old and new versions, or roll back to an earlier state if
something goes wrong.

The CANlogger code lives at:

  https://github.com/forrest-molg/CANlogger

When your mini PC arrives, you can pull the latest version of the app onto
it with a single command:

  git clone https://github.com/forrest-molg/CANlogger.git


THE LIFE OF A SINGLE SNAPSHOT
───────────────────────────────
To tie it all together, here is what happens in a single 10-millisecond
moment while the app is running:

  1. The oscilloscope on CAN Bus 2 finishes measuring 50,000 voltage
     readings over the last 10 ms.

  2. The backend collects those readings and notes the exact microsecond
     they began.

  3. The snapshot is placed in the spool on the hard drive, safely saved.

  4. In the background, the database uploader picks up that snapshot (and
     a batch of others just like it) and stores them permanently in the
     PostgreSQL database.

  5. The setup screen, if it is open, asks for the latest status. The backend
     reports: Bus 2, 6,482 snapshots captured, last one at 14:03:22.991047.

  6. Ten milliseconds later, the whole thing happens again.

This loop runs for every one of the five buses, simultaneously, for weeks
on end — unattended, without pause.


THE SIMULATOR
─────────────
Because your oscilloscopes have not arrived yet, the app currently runs in
simulator mode. Instead of talking to real hardware, it generates synthetic
signals that look like realistic CAN bus waveforms — complete with the
characteristic square wave shape, a small amount of electrical noise, and
occasional ringing artifacts that real signals produce.

This means you can run the full app right now, watch all five streams
counting upward, and verify that the storage and database plumbing works
exactly as expected — before a single piece of hardware is plugged in.

Switching to real hardware later is a one-line change in the settings file:

  mode: picoscope


A MAP OF THE FILES
───────────────────

  backend/              The Python engine room
    main.py             The front door — receives commands from the GUI
    config.py           Reads and writes the settings file
    models.py           Defines the shape of a snapshot and a status report
    capture_service.py  Runs the five parallel recorders
    simulator.py        Generates fake-but-realistic waveforms for testing
    storage.py          Saves snapshots to disk and forwards to the database
    picoscope_driver.py Placeholder for the real hardware connection

  config/
    default.yaml        The main settings file you can edit in a text editor

  frontend/
    index.html          The setup screen layout
    app.js              The setup screen logic
    styles.css          The setup screen appearance

  scripts/
    init_db.sql         Creates the database tables the first time

  docker-compose.yml    Describes the full app + database as one deployable unit
  Dockerfile            Describes how to build the app container
  start.sh              One command to start everything
  stop.sh               One command to stop everything
  README.md             Technical reference for developers


━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
